The widespread use of new technologies by students has forced universities to include active methodologies in their pedagogy. This process has accelerated due to the COVID-19 pandemic, introducing innovative changes in pedagogy. This has motivated many lecturers to increase student motivation. The need to keep the students' attention during long and tedious theoretical sessions has motivated this contribution. Furthermore, the need for students to develop their Web search skills and development of individual expertise and participation in a final group process that attempts to transform newly acquired information into a more sophisticated understanding has inspired this contribution. This paper presents the results obtained from the implementation of gamification and Discovery Learning instructional model in the Software Engineering subject of the Computer Science degree in the course 2021/2022. The joint use of gamification and the Discovery Learning instructional model through Webquests has never been studied before. They help students to better acquire the knowledge taught in class. The gap in the combination use of gamification and Discovery Learning instructional model compared to previous studies using one single method show an improvement in academic results, greater motivation on the part of the students, greater creativity and ability to put what they have learned into practice.

The digitalization of recent years has brought many changes in society, and especially in education. Today's young people are digital natives, and their information consumption has completely changed compared to that of their parents. Young people use all digital media to communicate and inform themselves (they are able to use their smartphones, tablets or computers for hours) and universities have realized this. For this reason, universities are trying to adapt to change by trying to include innovative pedagogical methodologies [24], [22].

These new technologies allow for better communication between the lecturer and the student. They also make students feel comfortable with tools they already know. Traditional classes are demotivating for them, and they do not pay attention to what the lecturer says. This is one of the main reasons why lecturers are including new technologies in the room. However, these technological advances need to be evaluated as the experience is often not the same from the point of view of students and lecturers [20].

The ability of being continuously connected through digital devices rivals the ability to concentrate and learn. For this reason, it is necessary to be very thorough when including active methodologies that include new technologies in the room. Always must be taken in mind that such use must be rational and beneficial to the learning process.

It has been shown that the motivation and involvement of students in the learning process is fundamental from the neurological point of view [21]. Therefore, innovative academic proposals have been accomplished in education in order to look for students interest through active methodologies and models as a structure to enhance motivation and implication [13], [3].

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, many of the classes became online from one day to the next. The discouragement of the students increased in this period due to the lack of interaction with classmates and long theoretical and little practical classes [6]. For this reason, one of the priorities for the next courses was to increase their motivation. One of the main challenges that a lecturer faces when it comes to learning is motivation. Motivation is demonstrated by personal choice to engage in an activity and determines the intensity of effort and persistence in that activity [16]. The following year the hybrid classes returned in which 2 days were online and 3 in person. It has not been until the 2021/2022 academic year when the improvement of motivation has been carried out, including gamification and Discovery Learning to the lecture room.

Gamification is a strategic attempt that can turn learning into an immersive activity. Perrotta et al. [34] point out that learning through enjoyment and fun can be a means of introducing students to a state of flow. According to Kapp, gamification is “using game-based mechanics, aesthetics and game thinking to engage people, motivate action, promote learning, and solve problems” [25]. Introducing gamification in the most theoretical part of the subject, aims to make students more motivated. Another objective is that the students can pay attention to what the lecturer says and that they do not disconnect during this process. Students must be focused. The theoretical aspects of all subjects are monotonous but important for students. Then they need these concepts to carry out the practical part and without these concepts, they are not capable. Games must be adjusted to their needs and students' characteristics [44], [26]. This is called adaptive gamification, which “is taking care of the gamification that each particular user needs in a particular moment, tailoring the gamification to the users and contexts” [4].

Secondly, “Discovery Learning is seen as a promising way of learning for several reasons, the main being that the active involvement of the learner with the domain would result in a better structured base of knowledge for the learner as opposed to more traditional ways of learning, where knowledge is said to be merely transferred to the learner” [39]. WebQuests are the main exponent of the Discovery Learning instructional model [19]. WebQuests were created in the decade of the 1990s by two teachers, Bernie Dodge and Tom March. Dodge was the one who initially developed this tool, whose purpose was to develop in students the ability to browse the Internet with a clear objective: to learn to select and retrieve data from multiple sources and develop thinking skills critical [10]. As a consequence, WebQuests are a powerful tool to induce students' critical thinking [7]. Critical thinking is a disciplinary process that proposes to analyze, synthesize and evaluate information, in such a way that knowledge is organized, reaching a correct position on a specific topic, at the same time being objective when analyzing or extracting an idea based on the observation, experience, reflection, reasoning attached to communication [11]. Critical thinking skill is fundamental for every software developers and the goal is their further improvement in the lecture room. Furthermore, despite being computer science students, they have difficulties finding information on the Internet when they want to solve a problem. It is very common to receive email from students with a programming problem whose answer is easily found with a simple search. “WebQuest activity is a helpful form of scaffolding for promoting learners' positive learning experiences regarding organizing information and problem-solving and reasoning skills” [40].

Similar to [29] with Discovery Learning with English in Hong Kong, we tried to find the gap of Discovery Learning in Software Engineering subject. Similarly, it is difficult to find papers applying Discovery Learning in Software Engineering subjects [18], [23]. The use of gamification in Software Engineering subjects is much more widespread [32], [2]. The joint use of Discovery Learning and Gamification has been studied only for gamified Webquests [35], [42], [28]. Nonetheless, the use of both separately, in different class activities in the same subject has not been studied, and it is a gap that this contribution tries to solve. In addition, this paper focuses on the subject of Software Engineering and tries to evaluate the use of each discipline separately and if, as a whole, has served to improve the academic results.

In this context, this paper presents the experience of adding gamification and Discovery Learning though WebQuests in a Software Engineering subject in a Computer Science degree. The reception of this experience has been quantitatively and qualitatively measured, answering the following research questions:

RQ1: How can academic results be better?

RQ2: Why are the students motivated to play with Wooclap and with gamification?

RQ3: Why does Wooclap and gamification make students study/learn more?

RQ4: What is the level of participants' agreement about the steps of WebQuest project in terms of introduction, task, process, resources, evaluation, and conclusion?

RQ5: What are the perceptions of participants towards working with WebQuest projects in terms of planning skills, problems faced, implementation, real-life experience, popular and unpopular features, suggestions, and integration ideas?

The remainder of this document is structured as follows: Section 2 presents related works on the gamification and Discovery Learning instructional model through WebQuests. Section 3 presents the case study of this work, including the motivation and implementation of the initiative. Section 4 describes the results obtained in the experience answering the research questions. Finally, Section 5 presents the conclusions and future lines of action.

The use of several learning techniques in the same subject is not the most common. Most of the papers present only one. It is much more difficult to find papers that combine gamification and WebQuests. However, we can find in the literature a few works that use gamification and WebQuests. For example, Petroulis et al. [35] use gamified WebQuests. They have planned 8 workshops, in which they have developed a WebQuest for each of them. These WebQuests are gamified with quizzes, and the lecturer evaluates and scores the achievements obtained by each group based on the rubric published for this purpose. Espinosa [42] has implemented a WebQuest in which 4 activities have been included. These activities are 4 different games with which students learn English lexis. Finally, Levitt and Piro [28] in a similar way to the previous works wants to gamify the WebQuest to motivate the students of graduate education courses. These teacher training students must create different WebQuests in which the tasks are gamified activities for their students. In this way, students learn how to create WebQuests and also design gamified activities for their students. It can be observed that all these works include gamification directly in the WebQuests, they do not develop two completely differentiated activities. In our case, the theoretical parts use gamification to further engage students and the WebQuests to develop their skills in groups and strengthen what they have learned through the Discovery Learning instructional model.

All these contributions have used WebQuests that have gamified them. In no case have they used both methods separately and check the benefits they could bring. These papers refer to the motivation and involvement of the students in the WebQuests. However, none of these papers refer to academic results, whether they are better, worse or remain the same.

The use of gamification in the educational environment is widespread. There are hundreds of works that have used gamification to motivate their students and try to improve the knowledge of their subjects. For example, Garcia-Cabot et al. [15] have used gamification with 27 students in the Master degree of Software Engineering for the Web. They compare the results obtained by comparing a control group and a group that has used gamification, obtaining better academic results, the latter. This process was carried out over two weeks with 5 teaching hours each. The students felt that gamification was beneficial to introduce the basic concepts of the subject. The platform used for gamification improved the relationships between students and made learning more participatory and motivating for the students. In the process, each assignment was scored, and a ranking was generated with each student's score. Pedersen et al. [33] introduced gamification in the Advanced Quantum Mechanics course, in which 47 students participated. Similarly to the previous study, two groups were compared, a control group and another group in which the course was gamified. The results obtained show better academic results in the group that used gamification. The process lasted 7 weeks, in which in all sessions, between 10 and 20 minutes were dedicated to gamified activities with the objective of learning the basic concepts of the subject. 49 students participated in Kyewski and Krämer's experiment [27], in which they asked themselves whether it was worthwhile to gamify an online subject. The results compare to a control group and surprisingly the academic results were worse in the group that used gamification. The gamified subject was a psychology seminar, and the process took place throughout the semester. The results show that the budgets have no influence in motivating the students with the subject to obtain better academic results or to obtain better results in the quizzes. Sánchez-Martín and Cañada-Cañada [36] gamified the whole semester of the subject Matter and Energy in Primary Education Degree. 36 students were involved, in which two groups were differentiated, a control group and the other group that used gamification. The students who were more involved in the game clearly obtained better academic results. For each game, students earned a number of points based on their achievements. Stansbury and Earnest [38] evaluated 93 students in college psychology courses. These classes lasted the entire course (1 year) with 3 50-minute sessions per week. The comparison between the gamified and control group shows an improvement in academic results. The results show that the students were more motivated, more involved and participative in the subject, as well as enjoying the classes more. For each game, a series of points were obtained and students could acquire different levels based on the results obtained. Finally, Fernandez-Antolin et al. [12] involved 171 students in the architecture degree. Two groups were compared, a control group and another in which the subject was taught gamified. The results show that the students have assimilated the technical concepts better than the students in the control group. They also show a higher motivation and participation on the part of the students. Thus, the academic results have been superior in the gamified group than in the control group.

With the exception of some of the contributions, the academic results were better in the groups or years in which gamification was used. In addition, in these contributions, it can be highlighted that the motivation of the students for the class activities has been increased. However, aspects such as a better structured base of knowledge are not worked on, nor is the ability of learning to select and retrieve data from multiple sources. Something that has not been worked on through gamification could be worked on through Discovery Learning such as thinking skills, critical analyze, synthesize and evaluate information reaching a correct position on a specific topic, at the same time being objective when analyzing or extracting an idea based on the observation, experience, reflection, reasoning attached to communicate.

Like gamification, WebQuests have been widely used in the academic world. There are a large number of works that have used them and studied their results, highlighting their benefits. Yang [41] divided his mathematics students into two groups, a control group with 25 students and an experimental group with 27 students. These 52 students were studied for the entire course. The WebQuests were developed using the PHP programming language. In order to know the learning level of the students, at the end of the tasks the teachers gave a questionnaire to the students. The academic results show better results in the students who used the WebQuests in the learning process. They also show higher satisfaction with the subject, IT capability, higher collaborative learning, learning reflection, and learning feedback. Chen [7] involved 188 Business Management degree students for 16 weeks with 3 hours per week. Five different WebQuests were conducted, and in this case there is no control group. The results show that the use of WebQuests improves students' knowledge acquisition and develops critical thinking. In addition, students show increased motivation for learning. Zendler and Klein [43] divided 51 students into a control and an experimental group. The 25 students in the experimental group performed better academically than those in the control group. The students accessed their WebQuests through a QR code and had to answer a multiple-choice test upon completion to find out the knowledge level of each of the groups. Soepriyanto et al. [37] conducted an experiment with 65 second year students of the Education Technology degree. These students were not divided into two groups, one of them being the control group. The WebQuests developed are 7 and are hosted on the Zunal platform.1 The objective was to work on the basic concepts of the Computer Network subject. In addition, they wanted to develop the ability to compare things, organize data, summarize data, evaluate data, synthesize data, and become a better problem solver. The results show great results from the students having been evaluated and seen the improvement of these skills. Finally, Wang [40] used WebQuests to teach programming in the university. The students were divided into two groups, an experimental group with 50 students and a control group with 59 students. The method was used during the whole semester (18 weeks, 3 hours per week) and 4 WebQuests were developed, one for each topic to be worked on. At the end, a questionnaire was administered to find out whether the students in each group had achieved the minimum programming knowledge required. The results reflect better academic results among the students who used the WebQuests. However, in the minimum knowledge questionnaire, there was no difference between the two groups; both groups acquired the necessary knowledge.

In this case, in these contributions to on Discovery Learning, the study of academic results has not prevailed, and it is difficult to highlight whether this methodology improves them. These contributions have highlighted that students show higher satisfaction with the subject, show higher collaborative learning, learning reflection, and learning feedback. Additionally, they concluded that it improves students' knowledge acquisition and develops critical thinking, develop the ability to compare things, organize data, summarize data, evaluate data, synthesize data, and become a better problem solver. However, they have not studied deeply if it increases the motivation of the students.

All these works, although separately, have all tried to improve the academic results of the students, they have tried to improve their learning and motivation. This work has the same objectives, but instead of using one technique separately, it tries to combine them and use the advantages of each of them. Results will show if the combination of gamification and Discovery Learning enhance academic results, motivation and critical thinking.

This section aims to describe the employed gamification process and the Discovery Learning instructional model in detail, starting from its inception and covering its different phases, as well as the methodology of each one.

The experience has been developed in the Faculty of Engineering in the degree of Computer Science. 41 third-year students of the Software Engineering subject have been enrolled in the experience. This process has only been carried out in one part of the subject, the testing part, both static and dynamic testing. This term is the longest in the Software Engineering subject.

In recent years, universities have been immersed in a profound change due to digitalization. Today's students, all of them digital natives, demand new technologies in the educational world. Students use for hours their computers, tablets or cell phones, while university classes still use traditional methods. These classes are very tedious and boring for students, and it is common for them to stop paying attention.

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, all of us, students and lecturers were forced to stay at home and adapt to online classes. This circumstance made more visible the need for new technologies in the university educational world. The obligation to adapt all the content to the online mode brought with it a great increase in work and dedication on the part of the teaching staff. On the part of the students, the theoretical classes became much more boring and students paid less attention. It also meant that the exercises presented annually were not understood or could not be performed by the students, as they did not have the knowledge previously taught.

With the return to the classroom the following year in a hybrid manner (2 days of online classes and 3 days of face-to-face classes), the traditional delivery method was still a problem. There was a significant difference in student participation between online and face-to-face classes. The face-to-face classes were more dynamic and participatory than the online classes, although overall, classroom participation was low. Online participation was null.

Taking into account the students' need to use technology in the classroom and the need to increase their motivation, the idea was to gamify the theoretical classes. For this purpose, tools such as Kahoot, Quizzizz or Wooclap were studied. The latter allows through the free version that all students of the subject can participate. It is also integrated with Moodle, which facilitates its integration with all the material of the course, since Moodle is the platform used as a base at the university.

On the other hand, students are required to work in groups during the course and especially when the subject of testing is taught. In these group works, students have problems in understanding certain concepts explained in class. To avoid this problem, gamification has been introduced. In addition, students have difficulties in finding the necessary information on the Web to help them solve the problems that arise during the development of the work. Students tend to write emails (if the work is being done outside the classroom) or to ask the lecturer quickly if they do not find answers in a short time. Once they are introduced to the world of work, students lack this help. WebQuests encourage the search for information on the Web. For this reason, different WebQuests have been designed to complete the exercises related to the subject and to help students become more proficient with the search for information.

The WebQuests not only allow to improve the search on the Web. Other main reasons are that “a WebQuest is a scaffolded learning structure that uses links to essential resources on the World Wide Web and an authentic task to motivate students' investigation of a central, open-ended question, development of individual expertise and participation in a final group process that attempts to transform newly acquired information into a more sophisticated understanding. The best WebQuests do this in a way that inspires students to see richer thematic relationships, facilitate a contribution to the real world of learning and reflect on their own metacognitive processes” [10].

In this subsection, two totally different processes that have been carried out during this experience will be described. During the theoretical classes, gamification has been included to try to motivate the students. In the same way, with the intention of motivating the students, the practical parts of the subject have been carried out using the Discovery Learning instructional model. Different WebQuests have been developed for this process.

Gamification was used in the theoretical sessions of the course. Two parts can be differentiated: the games at the beginning of class to remember the concepts of the previous day and the games during the theoretical session.

At the beginning of the theoretical session, a game was played to reinforce the knowledge taught the previous day. These sessions were less than 10 minutes and were usually multiple-choice questions with 4 possible answers and 1 correct answer. The objective was to test the knowledge of the class before being able to continue with the session. If the question was answered correctly by a large majority of the students, the lecturer did not go into much depth to clarify the concept. However, if the question was answered incorrectly by the majority, the lecturer tried to explain the concept again. The reasons could be an incorrect explanation or that it is a complex concept. Students want to get it right because they get points for each correct answer. At the end of the session they can know their position in the classification with respect to the classmates. They always want to be ahead of their friends. The aim of the game is for the students to learn all the concepts explained in the classroom, as well as to have fun. Wooclap has been used in this part, which is a dynamic tool that allows students to participate in gaming during the class, through real-time interactions that provide us with immediate feedback.

During theory sessions, students tend to stop paying attention. If the lecturer is talking for more than an hour, it makes the classes boring and difficult to follow. Although the lecturer can ask questions to the students to try to attract their attention, it is not possible to get the attention of all students. Therefore, the frequent introduction of questions makes it difficult for the student to disconnect. If they are dynamized using the gamification technique, the students feel more motivated. As at the beginning of the class, correct answers score points. At the end of the class, the one with the most points wins. Fig. 1 shows an example about a question performed in class. On the left, it is shown the screen that the students see with the question and the different options. On the right, the screen that the lecturer sees with the different answers given so far by the students.


The Discovery Learning instructional model was used for the practical sessions of the course. The WebQuests have allowed us to carry out this instructional model. Among the objectives are to motivate students to face the challenges presented to them through the WebQuests. Another objective is for students to learn or improve their research skills. Students should be able to search for and find relevant information to help them solve problems that arise. They should not go directly to the teacher when they have problems, they should look for a solution on their own. Students should also gain their own expertise on the topic being worked on, as well as learn to work in groups. For this reason, the work developed through WebQuests is always group work.

Although the process section of the WebQuest identifies the steps to be followed, students must plan and develop their tasks in order to achieve the objective that is set for them. They are always provided with material through videos, blogs, books, etc. This material is not enough, but it is a great help to get them started with the tasks. Students decide how far they want to go, as they are provided with a rubric with which the teacher will evaluate their work. The WebQuest developed for students was about how to learn and use Katalon, a free solution for Web test automation.

This section shows the main results obtained from the student results of the courses 20/21 and 21/22 and the surveys conducted to gather the opinion of the students, followed by an analysis of each of the research questions.