Past studies have shown the efficacy of flipped classrooms and gamification learning approaches. However, we know little about the blend of these learning approaches. This study compares the effectiveness of gamified flipped classrooms (GFC) to traditional classroom (TC) learning approaches. We study two different undergraduate cohorts over six-week course delivery in management and IT in a university in UAE. We collected data through an online survey from 105 students (control and experimental) and performed interviews with two focus groups of students. We identified the GFC learning approach as more efficient in terms of complexity of the technique, task orientation, student engagement, satisfaction, knowledge, and learning motivation. We also found a slight difference between the two approaches in terms of student skill development. Surprisingly, the control group achieved better course learning outcomes through TC than the experimental group using GFC because of perceived content relevance. The study provides additional evidence on the relevance of employing mixed learning approaches in classrooms, not to rely on one approach of university lecturers and learning enhancement units solely.

The transition from the traditional classroom (TC) learning approach to experimenting with modern technology-facilitated teaching methodologies has been developing since the beginning of the 21st century. Research studies (Lee, 2011; Strayer, 2012; Toqeer, 2013) found that these methodologies had a significant impact on students’ academic performance, engagement, motivation, and accelerated learning experience (Bernard & Ghaffari, 2019; Castedo et al., 2019; Chen & Law, 2016; Sung et al., 2017; Whitton & Langan, 2019). Game-based learning (GBL) also became trendier in classrooms (Burke, 2016).

From another side, several studies explored the successful implementation of flipped learning (FL) and its positive impact on students' satisfaction and performance (Kim, 2018; Alsaleh, 2020; Ping et al., 2020), however it is still questionable whether this impact differs across different subject area and when blended with gamification given the fact that gamification’ highlights the importance of context and individual motivation (Perryer et al., 2016). Therefore, in this paper, we will explore the impact of combination of (FL) (Baker, 2000, pp. 9–17; Lage et al., 2000) and gamification (Kapp, 2012) on student learning experience in management subject area. Along with the blend of different learning approaches, it is equally essential to establish relevance between course content and students’ background (Keller, 1983; Frymier & Shulman, 1995).

Since we have blended FL and gamification approaches for this study, we refer to it as gamified flipped classroom (GFC) learning approach. We aim to explore, extend and report the efficacy of GFC as compared to a TC, where the efficacy is measured by enhancing student engagement, reducing the complexity of the technique, enabling clear task orientation, increasing student satisfaction, and improving session effectiveness (Durrani, 2019). We attempt to answer the following research question: Is the efficacy of GFC more than the TC considering the content relevance?

The paper's organization is: Section 2 provides literature on related studies in the effectiveness of FL, gamifications and then the development of the study hypothesess for the quantitative analysis. In Section 3, we discuss the methods of data collection, quantitative analysis and interviews data. In Section 4 we provide the results and discussion of the quantitative analysis and the interviews. Finally, Section 5 concludes with the research question, implications, limitations, and directions for future research.

The term flipped learning (FL) was derived from Baker (2000, pp. 9–17) and Lage et al. (2000) to accelerate students’ learning effectiveness and to enhance teaching experience in higher education. As Hamdan et al. (2013) proposed, the components of an FL constitute three key elements and four pillars. Key ingredients include familiarization of the study material before the session; rewards to motivate students to prepare for the class and measure their understanding; and time to understand

We submitted an ethics application to the University ethics committee. After written approval to conduct the research was received (approval# MC-H-F-2020-04-30), the study begun. The survey data was collected using a secured Moodle platform. This environment was only accessible to enrolled students, authorized academic and technical staff. Before the survey, students were presented with an online consent form and notified of their choice to take part or withdraw. We assured students' anonymity

Using SPSS 2020, we applied several statistical tests to our data. Kolmogorov-Smirnov and Shapiro-Wilk's normality tests (p > 0.05) applied to all the latent factors and sub-factors (Table 1). The result obtained for both GFC and TC cohorts were not normally distributed. For example, the latent factors ENG in GFC (M = 3.79, SD = 1.061) with Skewness of −1.622 (SE = 0.364) and Kurtosis of 2.245 (SE = 0.749). Whereas ENG in the TC (M = 2.97, SD = 1.359) with Skewness of 0.602 (SE = 0.553) and

The primary goal of this research was to measure the perceived efficacy of GFC as compared to TC. We explored different aspects in this study including, student engagement in the classroom, task orientation clarity, effect of the complexity of the technique, course effectiveness, course learning outcomes achieved, and the overall students' satisfaction. For this purpose, we developed a delivery model and applied it to a mandatory IT and management foundation course studied by 85 control group

Usman K. Durrani graduated from RMIT University Australia in 2014 with his PhD in Information systems. He is an Assistant Professor in the College of Engineering and Information Technology at Ajman University UAE. His research interests include gamification, blended learning, flipped classroom approaches, and lean software engineering processes


